Chapter 3 Working Capital management

## 0 syllabus coverage

C1. The nature, elements and importance of working capital
a) Describe the nature of working capital and identify its elements.[1]
b) Identify the objectives of working capital management in terms of liquidity and profitability, and discuss the conflict between them.[2]
c) Discuss the central role of working capital management in financial management.[2]
C2. Management of inventories, accounts receivable, accounts payable and cash
a) Explain the cash operating cycle and the role of accounts payable and accounts receivable.[2]
b) Explain and apply relevant accounting ratios, including: [2]
i) current ratio and quick ratio
ii)inventory turnover ratio, average collection period and average payable period
iii) sales revenue/net working capital ratio.
c) Discuss, apply and evaluate the use of relevant techniques in managing inventory, including the Economic Order Quantity model and Just-in-Time techniques.[2]
d) Discuss, apply and evaluate the use of relevant techniques in managing accounts receivable, including:
i) assessing creditworthiness [1]
ii) managing accounts receivable [1]
iii) collecting amounts owing [1]
iv) offering early settlement discounts [2]
v) using factoring and invoice discounting [2]
vi) managing foreign accounts receivable.[2]
e) Discuss and apply the use of relevant techniques in managing accounts payable, including:
i) using trade credit effectively [1]
ii) evaluating the benefits of early settlement and bulk purchase discounts [2]
iii) managing foreign accounts payable.[1]
C3. Determining working capital needs and funding strategies
a) Calculate the level of working capital investment in current assets and discuss the key factors determining this level, including:[2]
i) the length of the working capital cycle and terms of trade
ii) an organization’s policy on the level of investment in current assets
iii) the industry in which the organization operates.

## Working Capital

Working capital represents the net current assets which is available for day-to-day operations activities.
It is defined as a business’s current assets (e.g. inventories, trade receivables and cash) less its current liabilities (e.g. trade payables).

### 1.1 Importance of Working Capital

Management must ensure that a business has sufficient working capital. The consequences of too little will be cash flow problems highlighted by:
Exceeding an agreed overdraft limit.
Failing to pay suppliers (including employees) on time.
Inability to take advantage of discounts for prompt payment.
In the long run, a business with insufficient working capital cannot meet its current obligations. It will be forced to cease trading even if it remains profitable on paper.
On the other hand, if a business ties up too much resource in working capital, it will earn a lower-than-expected rate of return on capital employed. Again, this is not a desirable situation.
Working capital management is crucial to the effective management of a business because:
Current assets may be a high proportion of total assets.
Failure to control working capital, and therefore liquidity, is a major cause of business failure.
Two major questions must be considered:
How much to invest in working capital?
How to finance working capital?
Example 1
Which TWO of the following are correct descriptions of net working capital?
A Current asset – current liabilities
B Inventory days + accounts receivable days – accounts payable days
C Current assets / current liabilities
D The long-term capital invested in net current assets

### 1.2 Objectives of working capital management

The two main objectives of working capital management are:
To ensure the organization has sufficient liquid resources to continue in business.
To increase its profitability.
However, the objectives of liquidity and profitability can conflict.
Therefore, when determining the appropriate level of working capital there is a trade-off between liquidity and profitability.
Businesses must avoid the extremes:
Overtrading arises when there is insufficient working capital to support the level of business activity. This also can be described as under-capitalization and is characterized by an increasing proportion of short-term to long-term finance.
Over-capitalization is an excessive level of working capital, leading to inefficiency.

### 1.3 working capital investment policy

Even within the same industry sector, companies will have different policies regarding the level of investment in current assets, depending on management's attitude to risk.
conservative approach
This approach involves investing a relatively high level of net working capital. A firm allows high levels of receivables and inventories, and keeps payables low. This policy will reduce the risk of liquidity problems, and would be also less profitable.
This approach is more appropriate if cash flows are erratic and unpredictable.
aggressive approach
This approach involves investing a relatively low level of net working capital. A firm choose to keep inventories and receivables as low as possible, and payables are maximized. This policy would potentially be more profitable, and would also be more risk. A moderate approach falls between the conservative and aggressive approaches.
This approach is more appropriate if cash flows are very predictable.
Moderate approach
A moderate approach falls between the conservative and aggressive approaches.

## Measurement of Working Capital


### 2.1 Working Capital Ratios


##### 1.Liquidity Ratios

Current Ratio =
If the current ratio falls below 1 this may indicate problems in meeting obligations as they fall due. Even if the current ratio is above 1 this does not guarantee liquidity, particularly if inventory is slow moving. On the other hand, a very high current ratio is not to be encouraged as it may indicated inefficient use of resources.
Quick Ratio (acid test) =
This measure is particularly useful where inventory moves slow and cannot be converted into cash quickly. The quick ratio is particularly relevant where inventory is slow moving. A company with slow-moving inventory should ideally have a quick ratio of at least 1. For a company with fast-moving inventory, the quick ratio can be less than 1 without suggesting that it is facing cash-flow problems.

##### 2. Efficiency Ratios

Receivables collection period
It is the time taken for customers to pay. Everything else being equal a business would prefer a shorter period.
Receivable Turnover
This shows how quickly receivable is converted into cash.
Example 2
The management of Lamara Co has annual credit sales of $20m and accounts receivables of $4m. working capital is financed by an overdraft at 12% interest per year. Assume 365 days in a year.
Calculate the annual finance cost saving if management reduces the collection period to 60 days (to the nearest dollar)
Inventory holding period
The time taken for inventory to be sold. Everything else being equal a business would prefer a shorter period.
Inventory Turnover
This shows how quickly inventory is sold; higher turnover reflects faster-moving inventory.
In exam questions: Use year-end figures in the statement of financial positions if averages are not available.
Example 3: Sep 2016, Q5
Crag Co has sales of $200m per year and the gross profit margin is 40%. Finished goods inventory days vary throughout the year within the following range:
Maximum  Minimum
Inventory (days)         120     90
All purchases and sales are made on a cash basis and no inventory of raw materials or work in progress is carried. Crag Co intends to finance its current assets with its overdraft.
In relation to finished goods inventory and assuming a 360-day year, how much finance will be needed from the overdraft?
A $10m
B $17m
C $30m
D $40m
For a manufacturer, there are three types of inventories: raw materials, work-in-progress, and finished goods. In this case, inventory holding period can be calculated as:
If production cost cannot be calculated, cost of goods sold gives a good approximation.
Payables payment period =
The time taken to pay suppliers. A business would prefer to increase its payables days, unless this proves expensive in terms of lost settlement discounts or leads to other problems such as a damaged reputation.
Example 4: Dec 2016,Q11
Mile Co is looking to change its working capital policy to match the rest of the industry. The following results are expected for the coming year:
$'000
Revenue      20,500
Cost of sales  (12,800)
Gross profit     7,700
Revenue and cost of sales can be assumed to be spread evenly throughout the year.  The working capital ratios of Mile Co, compared with the industry, are as follows:
Mile Co    Industry
Receivable days     50         42
Inventory days      45         35
Payable days       40         35
Assume there are 365 days in each year.
If Mile Co matches its working capital cycle with the industry, what will be the decrease in its net working capital?
○$624,600
○$730,100
○$835,600
○$975,300
Sales/net working capital =
It indicates how efficiently a business uses its working capital to generate sales. Everything else being equal, management would prefer sales/working capital to rise.
Always bear in mind that ratios are of little value unless compared with industry averages.

### 2.2 Cash Operating Cycle

The cash operating cycle is the period between paying suppliers and receiving cash from customers.
Cash Operating Cycle = Inventory holding period +Receivable collection period – Payables payment period
The longer the operating cycle, the greater the resources ‘tied up’ in working capital, so the more adverse cash flow difficulties an organization will face. All other things being the same:
the shorter the cycle is, the higher the profitability is
the longer the cash cycle, the more financing is required
when sales volume increase, the funds required for working capital will increase in approximate proportion to sales

### 2.3 influences on working capital investment level

Different business will have different level of working capital investment. And this may be due to
industry factors; and
Company-specific factors
General factors affecting
Nature of the industry - A supermarket will receive much of their sales in cash, so it can be able to operate with minimal receivables. However, this is would not be possible for a construction company.
Industry norm (policies of competitors) - If competitors offer more favorable credit terms, it may be difficult for the company to reduce receivables without losing business.
Seasonal factors – there may be a need to allow inventory to be higher as a season of peak sales approaches.
Company specific factors
Management’s risk attitude and working capital investment policy – a conservative investment policy will result in relatively high level of working capital.
Terms of trade - such as the credit period offered to customers.
Efficiency of working capital management - weak credit control and inefficiency in inventory managing will also lead to high level of working capital.

### 2.4 Overtrading

Although an optimal level of working capital may exist it may not be achievable due to factors beyond management’s control, such as an unreliable supply chain influencing inventory levels. However, businesses must at least avoid the extremes:
Overtrading
Over-capitalization

##### 1.overtrading

Overtrading occurs when a company tries to support a large volume of trade from a small working capital base. Also called undercapitalization, it often occurs when a business grows rapidly without an increase in long-term finance.
It can bring serious liquidity problem, and often happen at the start of new business, because:
Offer a long credit period to attract customers and break into the market
Rapidly sales expansion in a niche market
Often lack management skills to maintain adequate control over debt collection and production period.
So, the amount of cash required will increase, but companies will find it hard to raise long-term finance; hence, overtrading and business failure may result.
Indicators of overtrading
rapidly increase in sales revenue, often declining profit margin
increasing inventory holding period
increasing receivables collection period
declining cash holding and increasing short-term borrowing and overdraft
an increasing ratio of sales / net working capital
declining liquidity ratios (or below industry average)
If a business suffers from liquidity problems due to overtrading, the aim will be to reduce the length of the cash operating cycle. Possibilities to consider include:
Reduce the level of sales growth to a more suitable level
Increasing the level of long-term finance, such as equity or debt issue, or listing
Improve working capital management
-reducing inventory holding period and credit period offered to customers
-increasing the period of credit taken from suppliers
-using factor, discounting invoice, cash discounts to speed cash collection.

##### 2.overcapitalizaiton

Over-capitalization – an excessive level of working capital, leading to inefficiency.
example 5: 2012 JUNE- wobnig (a)-overtrading

## Managing Inventory


### 3.1 Objective of inventory management

Inventory is a major investment for most companies. Manufacturing companies’ inventories may amount to a substantial proportion of total assets.
Inventory Costs include:
Ordering Costs — administrative cost; delivery costs
Holding costs — cost of capital; Warehouse cost; Insurance; Deterioration and obsolescence
shortage costs — contribution from loss of sale; extra cost of emergency orders of inventory
Purchasing costs —relevant particularly when calculating discounts for bulk purchase
Keeping inventory levels high will lead to high holding cost, however, keeping inventory levels too low will face high stockout cost, reorder cost and lost bulk purchase discounts. So, in practice, there should be a balance between holding costs on one hand and stockout and reorder costs on the other hand.

### 3.2 inventory models/systems


##### 1.EOQ model

The Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) is the optimal quantity of inventory that should be ordered each time a purchase order is placed. This quantity will minimize the total costs relevant to ordering and holding inventory.
EOQ formula
Ch = cost of holding one unit inventory for one year
D = annual demand
Q = order quantity
Co = cost of placing one order
Then average number of units held can be expressed as Q/2, and number of orders in a year can be expressed as D/Q.
Annual total relevant cost:
Total cost is minimized when EOQ=
EOQ graph
Drawbacks of the EOQ Model:
Assumes constant demand (there may be fluctuation in demand in reality)
Assumes constant purchase price per unit and no bulk purchase discounts
assumes zero lead times
no risk of stock-outs
assumes order cost per unit and holding cost per unit is constant
these assumptions are critical and should be discussed when considering the validity of the model and its conclusions. In practice, demand and lead time may vary.
Bulk Purchase Discounts
If bulk purchase discounts are available, purchase costs are relevant and the decision whether the discount is worthwhile can be delt with as follows.
EOQ policy       bulk purchase policy
Holding costs      X                  X
Ordering costs     X                  X
Purchase costs     X                  X
Total costs        X                  X
Inventory related costs = purchase cost + ordering cost + holding cost
Select the order quantity that minimizes inventory related costs.
example 6: Nesud-(b) （Sep 2016）
From a different supplier, Nesud Co purchases $2·4 million per year of Component K at a price of $5 per component. Consumption of Component K can be assumed to be at a constant rate throughout the year. The company orders components at the start of each month in order to meet demand and the cost of placing each order is $248·44. The holding cost for Component K is $1·06 per unit per year.
(b) Evaluate whether Nesud Co should adopt an economic order quantity approach to ordering Component K. (6 marks)
(c) Critically discuss how Nesud Co could improve the management of its trade receivables. (10 marks)
Buffer Inventory
In reality, a company may hold buffer inventory to reduce the risk of stock-outs. If buffer inventory is required, the average inventory level becomes B+Q/2

##### 2.Re-Order Level System

Use this method to build safety inventory and minimizes the risk of running out of inventory.
Re-order level (ROL) – the level to which inventory should fall before placing a purchase order for replenishment.
Re-order level = maximum usage ×maximum lead time
Lead time – the time between placing and receiving an order.
Maximum inventory level
=Re-order level- (minimum usage ×minimum lead time) +Re-order quantity
Minimum inventory or Buffer safety inventory
=Re-order level- (average usage × average lead time)
Average inventory
= Buffer safety inventory +Re-order quantity/2

##### 3.just-in-time

A just-in-time purchasing system aims to minimize the cost of holding inventory by placing orders so that delivery is timed for when the goods are needed.
A JIT production system aims to minimize the cost of manufacturing by only producing goods as they are needed. Such a system should have only minimal inventory of raw materials and minimal wait time in production.
JIT inventory management aligns purchasing and production to weekly, or even daily sales demand. It aims to create a continuous flow of raw materials inventory into work-in-progress, which becomes finished goods to go immediately to the customer.
To operate a JIT inventory system, there are certain necessary conditions to be met: sufficiently flexible and reliable suppliers; close working relationships with suppliers and, if possible, geographical proximity for immediate deliveries; significantly investment by suppliers, etc.
benefits of JIT
A successful JIT system will reduce holding costs, and allows a firm to compensate for inefficient processes; this failure to deal with its inefficient processes is seen as hidden costs of holding inventory.
Examples of hidden costs include: failing to deal with unreliable suppliers, defective production process and poor labor relations.
reliable suppliers/staff, good quality, no lead-time
Drawbacks of JIT
JIT will not be appropriate if production processes and suppliers are unreliable, and especially where the consequences of a stock-out are serious. for example, in a hospital, a stock-out could be fatal.
Managing Account Receivables
A company will have to decide whether to offer credit to its customers and if so on what terms. These are important decisions and need to be carefully considered by senior management.
Offering credit can result in higher profits, however, it comes at a cost which include:
Finance cost-interest charged on an overdraft to fund the receivables
The possibility of bad debt
Administrative costs of debt collection
Cash discount if offering cash discount
Whether or not offer credit (extend credit) should be assessed by comparing whether the benefit from higher sales is greater than the costs associated with higher receivables.

### 4.1 Methods of Speeding Cash Collection


##### 1.Early Settlement Discount

Offering customers a percentage discount on an invoice for early settlement of amounts due.
Whether Settlement Discounts Should be Offered to Customers?
(1) Annual Effective Cost
Calculation the cost of discount (i.e. the annual effective cost)
Compare the annual cost of offering discount to the cost of financing account receivables (e.g. overdraft rate), if the cost of discount is larger than the overdraft rate, then the discount should not be offered.
Annual effective cost =
Where: d = discount (i.e. d%)
n = credit period –discount period
Example 7
A company offers its customers 30 days credit, but customers are taking 45 days credit on average. To speed up cash collection, the company is considering introducing a 1.5% discount for payment within 15 days. The company’s working capital requirement is financed with an overdraft at an annual cost of 10%.
Required: Determine whether the discount should be offered.
Note: the AER is calculated using compound interest, the simple interest = × would also be acceptable in the exam.
(2) Annual Cost/Benefit
Annual benefit:
Finance cost savings on reduced receivables (w1)   x
Profits on extra sales credit sales.                x
Annual cost:
Extra administration costs                     (x)
Discount cost on revised credit sales             (x)
Net benefit                                    x
If the net benefit is positive, a company should offer discount on financial grounds.
Working 1 finance cost savings on reduced receivables
Annual finance cost saving = x1-x2
Example 8 Melvin
Melvin Co has annual revenue of $900,000 (90% of which is on credit). The receivables collection period is 42 days despite offering only 30 days’ credit. Melvin Co has a contribution margin of 30% and finances receivables using an overdraft with an annual interest rate of 8%.
Melvin Co is considering introducing an early settlement discount while extending its standard credit terms to 50 days. Under the scheme:
Customers will be offered a 1% discount for payment within 14 days.
It is anticipated that 40% of customers will take the discount, while those who do not will keep to the new standard credit terms.
As a result of the extended credit terms, credit sales are expected to rise by 10%.
due to the extra administration involved, administration costs are expected to rise by $10,000 a year.
Required: Evaluate whether Melvin Co should offer the discount.
Key Advantages of offering cash discounts:
If customer take the discount and pay earlier, so the company receives the cash sooner, and by encouraging early payment, the risk of bad debts is reduced.
by offering a choice of payment terms, the company is likely to satisfy more customers
Key problems of offering cash discounts:
it is difficult to decide on suitable discount terms.
the introduction of such a discount will make the management of the sales ledger more complex and costly to run and is likely to make the budgeting of receipts from customers more difficult as the company could not be sure whether the discount will or will not be taken.
Too often customers will abuse the discount by taking it despite not paying early.

##### 2.Factoring

Businesses offering a range of services in the area of sales administration and the collection of amounts due from customers.
A debt factor may offer three closely integrated services:
Administration – the factor will maintain the sales ledger accounting function, and is responsible for chasing the customers and speeding up the collection of debts.
As factors have significant expertise, debts will be collected from customers more quickly. The factor will charge a fee for its service.
insurance against bad debts- the factor takes over the risk of loss from bad debts, this is known as a non-recourse factoring. In effect, the company is insured against bad debts. Fees are higher for non-recourse factoring.
Factor with re-course: bad debt remains the company’s problem.
Finance against sales - the factor advances a percentage of the sales value immediately on invoicing.
Evaluate Whether Use the Factor
Annual cost of using a factor
Factor fees (as a % of sales)                (x)
Annual benefit of using a factor
administration cost savings.                 x
reduced bad debt                          x
finance cost savings on reduced receivables(w)  x
Net Benefit                                 x
If the net benefit is positive, it will be financially acceptable to use the factor’s service.
Working 1 finance cost savings on reduced receivables
Annual finance cost saving = x1-x2
Advantages of Using a Factor:
Reduced administrative burden: outsourced debt collection saves time and effort.
Improved cash flow: conversion of receivables into immediate cash, and this can be very useful to a growing company
Access to expertise: the factor's expertise in credit management and collections can reduce the risk of bad debts and improve the overall efficiency of accounts receivable management
Disadvantages of Using a Factor:
the factor’s fees may be relatively high
difficult to rebuild its own sales ledger function at a later date
damage to customer relationships: loss of control over customer interactions and factor’s “vigour” manner may damage customer relationship
selective factor: if the business cannot factor all receivables, managing accounts will be fragmented.
Example 9 Velmin Co
Velmin Co has a turnover of $700,000. Receivable days are currently 48 despite the company only offering 30-days’ credit and bad debts are currently 3% of turnover. Velmin Co finances its receivables using its overdraft which has an annual interest cost of 8%. Velmin is considering the use of a factor.
The factor would charge 4% of turnover for a non-recourse agreement and would expect to reduce receivable days to 34 and bad debts to 2%. The factor would lend Velmin 75% of the outstanding receivables and would charge Velmin 1% above their current overdraft interest cost. It is anticipated that using the factor would reduce administration costs by $6,000 per annum.
Required: Evaluate whether or not Velmin Co should use the factor.

##### 3.Invoice Discounting

The selling of selected sales invoices to a third party for a discounted cash sum, while retaining full control over the receivables ledger.
When a business enters into an invoice discounting arrangement, a finance company will provide a cash advance as a percentage of the outstanding sales invoices – usually in the region of 80%. As customers pay their invoices or new sales invoices are issued, the amount advanced will fall or rise to maintain the level of finance at 80% of the receivables.
Advantages of invoice discounting
improved cash flow: the business receives a significant proportion of invoice amounts upfront.
Flexibility: the business can choose which invoices to discount, accessing funds when needed (e.g. to cover a temporary cash shortage).
Confidentiality: customers are unaware that the business borrows against sales invoices.
Disadvantages of invoice discount
Fees and interest charges make it an expensive form of financing compared to an overdraft or bank loan.
As the finance company has a legal charge over the receivable balances, the business has fewer assets to secure other borrowings.

### 4.2 Framework for Managing Receivables

The key areas of accounts receivable management are assessing creditworthiness, setting credit terms, monitoring and effective cash collection.

##### 1.Assessing Creditworthiness

The company must balance the risk inherent in granting credit against the necessity to allow enough credit to support the level of business.
To assess the creditworthiness of a customer or potential customer, a company may consider the following information sources:
Bank references - a bank reference can be fairly easily obtained
trade references -a trade reference from other company who has dealings with your potential customer
credit rating agency - are professional business which sell information about companies and individuals.
financial statements – financial statements of a company are publicly available information and can be quickly and easily obtained
information from the financial media - information in the national and local press, and in suitable trade journals and on the internet, may give an indication of the current situation of a company.
A visit to discuss their exact needs and impress them with good customer service and to “get a feel” for whether the business should be given credit.

##### 2.Setting Credit Terms and Monitoring Account Receivables

Once the decision has been taken to grant credit, then suitable credit terms must be set and the receivables that arise must be monitored efficiently if the costs of giving credit are to be kept under control.
Initially, a suitable credit limit should be set for each customer. This credit limit should only be allowed to grow slowly as your faith in the customer grows and all attempted breaches of the credit limit should be brought to the attention of the credit controller.
The accounts receivable should be continuously monitored. In order to do this a number of reports are useful:
an aged receivables list – this shows the length of time outstanding amounts have been owed. This is useful because it highlights breaches of credit terms, where amounts are “past due” and debt collection procedures need to be implemented.
A credit utilization report – this shows the proportion of each customer’s credit limit that is currently utilized. it indicates credit limits that may need to be reviewed and revised (upwards or downwards) and breaches of credit limits.
In larger organizations, customers may be classified by trade and country as it is then possible to evaluate exposure by both country and trade.

##### 3. Collection cash

Methods to help ensure customers pay on a timely basis include:
Send out the invoice quickly– The receipt of your invoice is the first indication a company gets of the efficiency of your debt collection system.
chasing letters – directed to a specific person, preferably at a reasonably senior level. However, preparing and sending reminders and final demands is costly (if there are many debtors), and their impact may be limited.
chasing phone calls – A credit controller who regularly contacts a suitably senior person and politely but firmly demands payment for overdue amounts can often achieve good results.
personal approach – a personal approach from a senior person in the company to a senior person at the customer can often yield results.
stopping supplies – this may be a powerful tool if, in the short term, the customer depends on the organization’s goods or services. However, the customer may source an alternative supplier in the longer term.
legal action – the process can be time consuming and costly (and likely to lead to the loss of the customer). However, just one letter from a solicitor can often be sufficient to obtain payment for fear of further legal action.
external debt collection agency – fees can be high, and is likely to lead to the loss of the customer.

### 4.3 Managing Foreign Accounts Receivables

Default risk
The risk of default on exports may be greater than on domestic sales.
Two risks exporter faced:
Export credit risk: the risk of failure or delay in collecting payments due from foreign customers. May be caused by Insolvent customers, Bank failure, Unconvertible currencies, Political risk.
Foreign exchange rate exposure (will be covered in chapter 15)
It is harder for a business to pursue any overdue amounts from a business in another country with a different legal system. Therefore, the exporter needs to carefully consider the payment method to minimize default risk and finance the export.
Payment methods
foreign account receivables can be paid in various ways:
Bill of exchange
A document drawn by the exporter and sent to the customer, who signs to accept responsibility to pay the amount specified on the stated date.
Documents of title to the goods are not released to the customer until the customer has accepted a bill of exchange.
The exporter may choose to:
Hold the bill until maturity (and then receive payment from the customer); or
Discount the bill with a bank to receive the cash earlier.
However, if the customer does not pay the bill, the bank will have recourse to the exporter (i.e. default risk stays with the exporter).
Forfaiting (票据买断\未偿债务买卖)
Forfaiting involves a bank discounting a series of bills of exchange without recourse to the exporter if the customer does not pay (i.e. default risk is transferred to the bank):
The non-recourse aspect makes this an attractive arrangement for businesses, but as a result, the cost of forfaiting is relatively high.
Is usually only available for large, medium-term or longer transactions.
The cost of forfaiting is relatively high, and it is usually only available for large, medium-term or longer transactions.
Letters of credit/ (银行开立的有条件承诺付款的信用证)
A Payment guarantee backed by one or more banks.
steps of arranging a letter of credit:
1. Both parties agree terms and conditions
2. The purchaser (importer)’s bank issues a letter of credit in the seller’s favor
3. The letter of credit is issued to the seller’s bank, guaranteeing payment to the seller once the conditions specified in the letter have been complied with. Typically, the conditions relate to presenting shipping documentation and dispatching the goods before a certain date
4. The goods are dispatched to the customer and the shipping documentation is sent to the purchaser’s bank
5. The bank then issues a banker’s acceptance
6. The seller can either hold the banker’s acceptance until maturity or sell it on the money market at a discounted value
Advantages
Letters of credit provide a high level of payment assurance for the seller.
Sellers can negotiate favorable payments such as shorter payment periods to improve cash flow.
The seller's exposure to credit risk is significantly reduced (because the buyer's bank, rather than the buyer, is responsible for payment)
disadvantages
Set up can be complex and take a significant amount of time before the sale occurs.
It is costly to purchasers and restricts their flexibility compared to other payment methods: payment must be made when due and buyers may be required to provide security.
Other methods
Export credit insurance - protects against risks that could result in non-payment by a foreign customer. It helps reduce the impact of non-payment, but premiums are high, and insurance does not typically cover 100% of the value of the foreign sales.
Countertrading (对等贸易)- In a countertrade arrangement, goods or services are exchanged for other goods or services instead of for cash. This can facilitate conservation of foreign currency and can help a business enter foreign markets. The main disadvantage is that the value of the goods or services received in exchange may be uncertain.
Export factoring – factors buy the trade receivable from the exporter and charge a commission on the transaction. Other service, such as operating the receivables ledger and credit insurance, may also be offered.
Managing trade payables
Businesses generally use trade credit as a flexible source of short-term finance. A business may even decide to pay suppliers late. However, trade credit is not without cost.
Should early settlement discounts be accepted?
Annual Effective Cost
Calculate the annual effective cost of refusing a discount
If the EAC of refusing the discount exceeds the overdraft rate, the discount should be accepted
Annual effective cost of refusing discount =
Where: d = discount (i.e. d%)
n = payable days – discount days
Annual benefit/cost of accepting the discount
Annual cost of accepting early settlement discounts
Current account payables                    x
New account payables if discount taken         x
Increased interest expense on reduced payables   x
Annual benefit of accepting early settlement
Discounts received                          x
Net benefit                                   x
If the net benefit is positive, the early settlement discount should be accepted on financially grounds.
Example 10 Dec 2016, Q15
Swap Co is due to receive goods costing $2,500. The terms of trade state that payment must be received within three months. However, a discount of 1.5% will be given for payment within one month.
(1) Which of the following is the annual percentage cost of ignoring the discount and paying within three months?
○6.23%
○9.34%
○6.14%
○9.49%
(2) If the cost of overdraft is 8%, whether or not should Swap accept the early settlement discount?
Example 11 Nesud (SEP 2016)
Nesud Co has credit sales of $45 million per year and on average settles accounts with trade payables after 60 days. One of its suppliers has offered the company an early settlement discount of 0·5% for payment within 30 days. Administration costs will be increased by $500 per year if the early settlement discount is taken. Nesud Co buys components worth $1·5 million per year from this supplier.
Nesud Co finances working capital from an overdraft costing 4% per year. Assume there are 360 days in a year。
(a)Evaluate whether Nesud Co should accept the early settlement discount offered by its supplier.

## Summary


### overview


### 6.2 technical articles

Management of foreign accounts receivable (s.2)
Accounts receivable management (s.1 – s.4)
Receivables collection (s.3 and s.4)
Chapter 4 Cash Management and Working Capital Finance

## 0 syllabus coverage

C2. Management of inventories, accounts receivable, accounts payable and cash
f) Explain the various reasons for holding cash, and discuss and apply the use of relevant techniques in managing cash, including:[2]
i) preparing cash flow forecasts to determine future cash flows and cash balances
ii) assessing the benefits of centralized treasury management and cash control
iii) cash management models, such as the Baumol model and the Miller-Orr model
iv) investing short-term.
C3. Determining working capital needs and funding strategies
b) Evaluate and discuss the key factors in determining working capital funding strategies, including:
i) the distinction between permanent and fluctuating current assets [2]
ii) the relative cost and risk of short-term and long-term finance [2]
iii) the matching principle [2]
iv) the relative costs and benefits of aggressive, conservative and matching funding policies [2]
v) management attitudes to risk, previous funding decisions and organisation size.[1]

## 1 Treasury Management

Treasury management – the efficient management of liquidity and risk in a business including the management of funds (generated from internal and external sources), currencies and cash flow.
As companies and financial markets have become larger, more sophisticated and increasingly international, there has been a trend towards establishing separate treasury departments where cash control is centralised to ensure efficient use.

### 1.1 Treasure’s role

Good cash management aims to have the right amount available at the right time. The treasurer will be involved in:
accurate cash flow forecasting, so that shortfalls and surpluses can be anticipated;
planning short-term borrowing when necessary;
planning investments of surpluses when necessary;
cost-efficient cash transmission;
dealing with foreign currency issues;
optimising banking arrangements;
planning major finance-raising exercises; and
accounts receivable/accounts payable policies.
In addition, the treasurer is often involved in risk assessment and insurance.

### 2.2 Centralized Treasury Management

Many organizations use centralized treasury department, which has several advantages.
Management by specialized staff with appropriate qualifications, expertise and experience.
economies of scale - as specialists are employed centrally, reducing duplication and maximizing the use of skilled human resources and financial management systems.
Ability to use "pooling", the netting of cash deficits against surpluses, to save interest expense from short-term financing.
Increased negotiating power with banks, as the amounts borrowed or deposited would be more substantial as a group.
More efficient foreign exchange risk management because the treasury department at the head office can find the group's net position on each currency and then consider an external hedge on this balance.
The treasury department of a large company may still have a degree of decentralization to ensure that decisions taken are appropriate to local circumstances.

## Cash Management


### 2.1 Reasons for Holding Cash

Three main reasons for holding cash.
(1) transactions motive – where cash is held to provide sufficient liquidity to meet current day-to-day financial obligations (e.g. the purchase of raw materials)
(2) Precautionary motive – where cash reserve is held as a cushion against unexpected expenditures (e.g. unforeseen downturn in sales, or disruption to production).
(3) speculative motive - where cash is held to take advantage of potential investment opportunities quickly.
However, cash holding must not be excessive as this leads to inefficiency. Cash balances belong to shareholders expecting to receive a significant investment return. So, the financial manager must try to balance between liquidity and profitability.
Therefore, any long-term surplus of cash should be either reinvested into projects with a positive net present value or returned to shareholders via:
dividends (regular or special dividend); or
share buy-back programmes.

### 2.1 Cash Flow Forecasting

A major task for the treasurer is cash flow forecasting. It will allow the business to plan how to deal with expected cash flow surpluses or shortages.

##### 1.Cash flow forecasting

Typical format
Workings
W1: cash from sales
W2: cash payments to suppliers
Example 1: Flit-(a) (Dec 2014)
Flit Co is preparing a cash flow forecast for the three-month period from January to the end of March. The following sales volumes have been forecast:
Notes:
1. The selling price per unit is $800 and a selling price increase of 5% will occur in February. Sales are all on one month’s credit.
2. Production of goods for sale takes place one month before sales.
3. Each unit produced requires two units of raw materials, costing $200 per unit. No raw materials inventory is held. Raw material purchases are on one months’ credit.
4. Variable overheads and wages equal to $100 per unit are incurred during production, and paid in the month of production.
5. The opening cash balance at 1 January is expected to be $40,000.
6. A long-term loan of $300,000 will be received at the beginning of March.
7. A machine costing $400,000 will be purchased for cash in March.
Required:
(a)Calculate the cash balance at the end of each month in the three-month period. (5 marks)
(c)If Flit Co expects to have a short-term cash surplus during the three-month period, discuss whether this should be invested in shares listed on a large stock market. (3 marks)
Analysis of cash flow Risk
Simulation models (e.g. Monte Carlo) can simulate future economic scenarios to estimate the probability that cash flows will be higher/lower than expected. Through generating probabilities, such models provide a better analysis of cash flow risk.
Example 2
Zombie Co is worried about exceeding its overdraft limit of $5m.
The company has used Monte Carlo analysis to produce the following forecasts of net cash flows for the next two periods and their associated probabilities.
Zombie Co expects to be overdrawn at the start of period 1 by $1.5m.
Required:
(a)Calculate:
the expected value of the period 2 closing balance;
the probability of a negative cash balance at the end of period 2; and
the probability of exceeding the overdraft limit at the end of period 2.
(b)Comment on how this analysis can assist Zombie Co in managing its cash flows

##### 2. investing/borrowing short-term

Having completed a cash flow forecast the treasurer may identify a short-term cash shortage. Potential sources of short-term funding include:
Debt factoring and invoice discounting to accelerate cash inflows
A bank overdraft
Short-term loans
Alternatively, a treasurer may discover that the company has a cash surplus for a short-term period. Surplus funds may arise due to the following:
overfunding – proceeds which are not yet fully required may have already been received from a share/debt issue;
disposal of surplus assets or divisions; and
operating surpluses.
Cash surpluses should not simply be held in a bank account, which provides low returns.
Long-term surpluses should be invested into positive NPV projects or used to pay a dividend.
For short-term surpluses, the general rule is to invest in short-term, low-risk, highly liquid investments (money market instruments such as Treasury bills, Short-term deposit, CDs, Commercial paper).

### 2.2 Cash Management Models

Cash management models aim at indicating the optimal amount of cash that a company should hold.

##### 1.Baumol Model

The Baumol model is derived from EOQ model and can be applied when there is a constant demand for cash. It assumes that cash is steadily consumed over time and cash is regular transferred from short-term investments into a current account when needed.
The model considers:
The annual demand for cash = D
The cost of each transfer from short-term investment into cash = Co
the opportunity cost of holding cash (the interest rate difference between rate on short-term investment and the rate paid on current account) = Ch
then use the EOQ formula to calculate the optimum amount of funds to transfer each time as short-term investments are converted into cash.
Economic transfer =
By optimizing the amount of funds to transfer, the model minimizes the opportunity cost of holding cash in the current account, thereby reducing cash management costs.
Drawbacks of the Baumol model
The assumption of constant demand for cash is unrealistic. A cash management model which can accommodate a variable demand for cash, such as the Miller-Orr model, is more relevant.
In reality, interest rates and transaction costs are not constant; interest rates, in particular, can change frequently.
The model assumes a constant use of cash financed by selling investments. This is unlikely in reality.
example 3 - 2015 June
A company needs $150,000 each year for regular payments. Converting the company’s short-term investments into cash to meet these regular payments incurs a fixed cost of $400 per transaction. These short-term investments pay interest of 5% per year, while the company earns interest of only 1% per year on cash deposits.
According to the Baumol Model, what is the optimum amount of short-term investments to convert into cash in each transaction?
A $38,730
B $48,990
C $54,772
D $63,246

##### 2. Miller-Orr model

Miller-Orr model can accommodate a variable demand for cash may be more relevant.
The Miller-Orr model allows for uncertainty in cash receipts and payments. It works as follows:
management set the lower limit for cash balance;
Calculation an allowable range or spread of cash flow fluctuations and establish the upper limit;
The cash balance is assumed to vary between a lower limit and upper limit. When the lower limit is reached, an amount of cash equal to the difference between return point and the lower limit is raised by selling short-term investments.
If the upper limit is reached, an amount of cash equal to the difference between the upper limit and the return point is used to buy short-term investment.
The model helps decrease the risk of running out of cash, while avoiding the loss of profit caused by unnecessarily high cash balances.
Formula:
Return point = lower limit+ 1/3×spread
Where: spread = upper limit-lower limit
Transaction cost = the fixed cost of buying or selling marketable securities
Variance = variance (i.e. standard deviation2) of the net daily cash flows
Interest rate = daily interest rate on marketable securities (i.e. daily opportunity cost of holding cash)
Drawbacks of Miller-Orr model
Subjectivity in setting a lower limit.
In practice, commissions for buying/selling short-term investments will likely be at least partly variable.
The complexity of estimating future volatility of cash flows.
example 4
if a company sets its minimum cash balance at $8,000 and estimate the following:
Transaction cost = $50 per sale
Daily cash flow variance = $4m; and
daily interest rate = 0.025%
Calculate the spread, the upper limit and the return point;
Interpret the result.

## 3 Working capital financing

Source of finance
Source of finance can be divided into short-term and long-term finance.
Short-term finance: Overdraft, Short-term bank loan, Account payables
Long-term finance: Equity, Debt
Short-term finance may be relatively cheaper. However, short-term finance may face the risks of:
renewal problems - short-term finance may need to be continuously renegotiated and renewal may not always be guaranteed.
unstable interest rate-when renew the funding arrangement, the company may face a fluctuation in short-term interest rates.
So long-term finance provides higher security to the borrower than short-term finance.
Therefore, it may be wise to at least partly use long-term finance as, although generally more expensive, it reduces exposure to renegotiation risk.
Types of assets
assets will be divided into three different types.
Non-current assets
permanent current asset - Some proportion of "current" assets may be more permanent. It represents the minimum current asset base (e.g. inventory, receivables) required to sustain normal trading activity.
Fluctuating current assets - total current assets will naturally fluctuate above the minimum permanent level – only this excess is truly short-term
Strategies for funding working capital
Conservative financing strategy
This would to use long-term finance not only for the permanent current assets but also for part of the fluctuating current assets. This may be relatively expensive but is of lower risk. Therefore, a conservative policy is consistent with high risk-averse management.
Aggressive financing strategy
This would be to use short-term finance not only for all fluctuating current assets but also for some of the permanent current assets. This is potentially a cheap financing strategy but may at the expense of higher risk.
Matching policy
The matching policy of working capital financing argue that any permanent current assets should be matched with long-term finance, and the fluctuating current assets should be matched with short-term finance. the matching policy is consistent with management accepting a moderate level of risk.
Factors affecting working capital finance strategy
management attitude to risk
short-term finance is higher risk to the borrower because it may not be available in the future when needed.
Strength of relationship with the bank
a strong relationship will encourage the use of short-term finance as overdraft will be available when required to provide short-term finance.
Ability to raise long-term finance
if long-term finance is hard to access, it means there is a greater need to use short-term finance.
working capital investing policy versus funding policy
Working capital investment policy is concerned with the level of investment in current assets, with one company being compared with another. Working capital funding policy is concerned with the relative proportion of short-term and long-term finance used by a company.
Both working capital investment policy and funding policy use the terms conservative, moderate and aggressive. In investment policy, the terms are used to indicate the comparative level of investment in current assets on an inter-company basis. In funding policy, the terms are used to indicate the way in which fluctuating current assets and permanent current assets are matched to short-term and long-term finance sources.
example 5: Sep 2016, Q7
Pop Co is switching from using mainly long-term fixed rate finance to fund its working capital to using mainly short-term variable rate finance. Which of the following statements about the change in Pop Co’s working capital financing policy is true?
A Finance costs will increase
B Re-financing risk will increase
C Interest rate risk will decrease
D Overcapitalization risk will decrease
Example 6 march/Jun 2021
Example 7-Amax Co (March/June 2022)
Amax Co is a multinational company which has been reviewing its working capital
Amax Co has received an offer of a discount for bulk purchase from Bard Co, one of its major suppliers. Bard Co has offered a 0.5% discount on orders of 60,000 units or more of Component X. Amax Co currently consumes 240,000 units of Component X each year and places orders of 20,000 units at the end of each month. Holding cost for Component X is $1 per unit per year and ordering costs are $250 per order. Amax Co does not maintain any buffer inventory of component X.
Colix Co, a major supplier of Component M to Amax Co, has offered a 1% early settlement discount for payment within 30 days.
Amax Co currently takes 72 days to settle outstanding invoices with Colix Co. Amax Co has a cost of short-term finance of 6% through an overdraft and no surplus cash. Assume that there are 360days in each year.
Amax Co currently has decentralized treasury operations, but is considering implementing a centralized treasury department.
Using months as a basis, what is the financial consequence of accepting the bulk purchase discount?
A Benefit of $8,000 per year
B Benefit of $12,000 per year
C Cost of $13,000 per year
D Cost of $8,000 per year
Using days as a basis, what is the financial consequence of accepting the early settlement discount?
A Benefit of $48,000 per year
B Cost of $32,000 per year
C Cost of $80,000 per year
D Benefit of $80,000 per year
In relation to managing foreign accounts receivable, which of the following statements is correct?
A company expecting to receive foreign currency from foreign accounts receivable will be concerned about the risk of the foreign currency appreciating against the domestic currency
B the safest way to conduct business with foreign accounts receivable is by making a sale where goods are shipped and delivered before payment is due (open account)
C there is no need to assess the creditworthiness of foreign customers if a company has export credit insurance for foreign accounts receivable
D discounting bills of exchange can reduce foreign accounts receivable default risk
In relation to Amax Co's proposed change to treasury management operations, which of the following statements is correct?
A Local management will be incentivised to maximise profitability
B Amax Co will be more responsive to localised needs for currency hedging
C Amax Co will suffer a loss of autonomy at a local level
D The change should increase the cost of hedging foreign currency risk for Amax Co
(5) In relation to working capital funding strategy, which of the following statements is
correct?
A An aggressive strategy seeks to maximize liquidity at the expense of profitability
B Short-term finance has a higher cost than long-term finance
C Fluctuating current assets should be financed from a short-term source
D A moderate or matching strategy finances current assets from a short-term source.

## Summary


[TABLE 1]
Annual Holding costs | Ch × Q /2
Annual ordering costs | Co × D/Q
Total relevant costs | Ch × Q /2+ Co × D/Q

[TABLE 2]
 | Existing | revised
Receivable collection period |  | 
receivables |  | 
Annual finance cost | X1 | X2

[TABLE 3]
 | Existing | revised
Receivable collection period |  | 
receivables |  | 
Annual finance cost | X1 | X2

[TABLE 4]
 | January | February | March
 | $ | $ | $
Cash inflows |  |  | 
Cash from Sales (W1) | X | X | X
Non-current asset disposals | X | X | X
Share/debt issues |  | X | 
Total Cash inflows | X | X | X
Cash payments to supplier(W2) | (X) | (X) | (X)
Wages | (X) | (X) | (X)
Dividends | (X) |  | 
Purchase of non-current assets |  |  | (X)
Interest/principal on debt | (X) | (X) | (X)
Total cash outflows | (X) | (X) | (X)
Net Cash flow | X | X | (X)
Opening balance | X | X | X
Closing balance | X | X | (X)

[TABLE 5]
 | Jan | Feb | Mar
Cash sales | X | X | X
Cash from receivables | X | X | X
Cash sales for the month | X | X | X

[TABLE 6]
 | Jan | Feb | Mar
cash purchase | X | X | X
cash payments of payables | X | X | X
Cash payments for the month | X | X | X

[TABLE 7]
Period 1 | Probability | Period 2 | Probability
Cash flow |  | Cash flow | 
$000 |  | $000 | 
6,000 | 20% | 8,000 | 35%
3,000 | 50% | 4,000 | 40%
(2,500) | 30% | (8,000) | 25%